---
layout: post
title:  "Consulting a Local Program at NC State"
author: Aaryan
categories: [project, machine learning, clustering, higher education, consulting, practicum, marketing, tableau, model deployment, NLP, tableau]
date: 2025-04-09 14:34:00 +0000
image: 'assets/images/agi-title.png'
featured: true
comments: true
---

<p style = "color:rgb(119, 117, 117);"><i><strong> Project Timeline: </strong> January 2024 to May 2024 (5 Months)</i></p>

Prior to the completion of my undergraduate degree, I had the wonderful task of working alongside 4 future data professionals/consultants on an analytical practicum project for the Agricultural Institute at NC State University. 

Not only was this project one of the most important projects in my undergrad, it was also one of my first real client-facing projects.

**Agenda for this article:**
1. *Scope and Data Cleaning*
2. *Marketing Dashboard*
3. *Machine Learning Model and Deployment*
4. *Working with a Client*
5. *What I have learned*

Let's get into it!

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">Key Takeaways</h1>

1. Consulting clients using data-related insights
2. Working with Tableau to create a marketing dashboard
3. utilizing NLP to understand retention and education value at a deeper level
4. Working on a client-facing project
5. Creating and deploying a machine learning model
6. Personal Growth

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">Scope and Data Cleaning</h1>

To assist AGI in their future pathway of improvement, my team was tasked with the following:
  - Identify key recruiting metrics and further analysis
  - Determine the post-grad value of AGI
  - Create forecasting tool for retention and students of concern

To ensure we understood what the client specifically wanted, we set up 2 meetings -- a kickoff and a follow-up -- to obtain a great understanding of the project. Without a good understanding, are you really going to provide value? (Answer is no.)

From this meeting, we found out that the client wanted to see where majority of their students come in from, demographic and application wise, where their alumni are currently working at, what students and alumni have to say about the program, and most importantly, a tool that allows staff and faculty to be more hands-on with their students and intervene with at-risk students in hopes of increasing student retentions (outlier detection). 

With this information, we were given our fair share of data and knew exactly how to attack the problem. With our problem in mind, we did EDA on all data files to ensure all files were useful and ensured unnecessary files did not take up our storage.

However, our data came with some integrity issues.

For starters, our data came with Personally Identifiable Information (PII). As any data scientist knows, PII is something that should be avoided to reduce data concerns for individuals in the dataset. Additionally, bias can arise from PII. 

The data we obtained was enough for 2 semesters worth of students, which is not enough for my team to conduct a forecasting or outlier detection tool. With these issues arising, we talked to our sponsor and increased the number of observations we had, ensuring that we can at least make a framework and play around with the data. However, our PII issue was never resolved, as I had no idea that this was a major issue while conducting this project.

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">Marketing Dashboard</h1>

To assist the AGI in their marketing efforts, my team conducted statistical analysis and basic NLP on survey data from alumni, current students, and students that transferred/dropped out. 

For statistical analysis, we conducted basic means and medians to obtain average salaries given their education concentration and their graduation year. Additionally, we looked at where survey takers found value in the program given professional and personal benefits. Our results can be seen in the powerpoint below! (Slide 23)

For basic NLP, we took to R and conducted term frequency analysis on key areas of our analysis, such as reasons why students decided not to attend the program, as well as the common job titles within alumni. 

To ensure that our clients had updated material, our team created an updated flier and consolidated job-related material into a [Tableau dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/views/AGI_Dashboard_Draft1_17442452104560/AGIDashboardHome?:language=en-US&:sid=&:redirect=auth&:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link) in which they can follow our analysis and revert back to as a blueprint!

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">Machine Learning Model and Deployment</h1>

In order to forecast and create an outlier detection tool for faculty and staff to intervene with students, our team decided that a clustering analysis would ensure that we find hidden components in why

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">Working with a Client</h1>

Data came in 3 weeks later and 8 weeks later (given a 16 week course)

<h1 style="color:rgb(166, 15, 15);">What I have learned</h1>

